---
title: "Applying a “Transform, Encode, KNN search” framework to match items with Amazon SageMaker and Amazon OpenSearch Service"
slug: "transform-encode-knn-search"
date: 2023-05-03T00:00:00+10:00
draft: false
description: "An item-matching framework using data transformation, learned encodings, and KNN search on SageMaker and OpenSearch."
tags: ["AWS","SageMaker","OpenSearch","machine learning","KNN"]
canonicalURL: "https://dxiaochuan.medium.com/applying-a-transform-encode-knn-search-framework-to-match-items-with-amazon-sagemaker-and-a6e6ba599f63"
---

*Originally published on [Medium](https://dxiaochuan.medium.com/applying-a-transform-encode-knn-search-framework-to-match-items-with-amazon-sagemaker-and-a6e6ba599f63).*

## Table of contents

- Introduction

- Solution overview

- Setup

- ML Model Training & Item Indexing

- Item Matching & Category Prediction

- Clean up

- Summary

- Where to go from here?

## Introduction

When companies work with data that originates from various sources, or when the process of collecting the data has changed over time, the data often becomes difficult to organize. For instance, product category names might be similar but not identical, making it challenging to group them together on an e-commerce website. In such cases, one option is to manually create a map that connects the source data to the target data, and transform the data into a consistent taxonomy. This process can be tedious, especially when dealing with large datasets that contain hundreds of thousands of rows of data, with new data regularly flowing in.

One way to address the challenge of organizing data with inconsistent category names is to use a matching application. Such an application can automatically predict the taxonomy for a newly added item and find similar items from a database. The ability to find similar items is particularly useful in explaining the results, as end users can refer to existing items to better understand why the application considers the query item similar.

To build an application that supports both category prediction and similar item matching, we can leverage a semantic matching approach. The state-of-the-art method of semantic matching is by computing vector representations of items. These vector representations, also known as embeddings or feature vectors, are generated through the training of machine learning models. The models are designed to learn an embedding space where similar items are located close to each other, while dissimilar items are placed far apart. The proximity of two items in the embedding space determines their level of similarity. Using embedding in a matching application offers several advantages over traditional methods that rely on business rules. For instance, by using embeddings, the manual definition of similarity becomes unnecessary, and the method is able to leverage both explicit features and implicit information from the features of the items.

Building a matching application involves four high-level steps: transforming raw features, generating embeddings for a query item, finding similar embeddings from an embedding database, and predicting category.

By transforming raw features, the application can covert domain-specific attributes to some features that could be understood by ML models.

By creating embeddings for a query item, the application is able to represent its semantic meaning in a numerical format. [Amazon SageMaker](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sagemaker/latest/dg/hugging-face.html) enables customers to train, fine-tune, and run inferences using Hugging Face models for Natural Language Processing (NLP) on SageMaker. You can leverage the Hugging Face framework in Amazon SageMaker to encode item features (for example numeric attributes, text, and images) into embeddings.

By finding similar embeddings from an embedding database, the application can find similar items based on predefined distance functions. [Amazon OpenSearch Service](https://aws.amazon.com/opensearch-service/) now supports the [cosine similarity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cosine_similarity)metric for k-NN indexes. Cosine similarity measures the cosine of the angle between two vectors, where a smaller cosine angle denotes the higher similarity between the vectors. With cosine similarity, you can measure the orientation between two vectors, which makes it a good choice for some specific semantic search applications. You can build an embedding index using the inventory item embeddings (generated by a Huggingface ML model), and then query the index using query item embedding. The embeddings can be also used to predict the category of query items.

For this post, I use a public dataset of [Amazon product reviews](https://cseweb.ucsd.edu/~jmcauley/datasets.html#amazon_reviews) that contains metadata associated with office products such as title, description, and category. We want to see if we can train a classifier to predict the category of an office product based on its title and description and find similar items from existing inventory. You can apply this solution to other use cases, where you could take the product title and product description and predict the product category. To improve the performance of this model, we may also want to introduce other associated data, but for this example, we only focus on these two features. The code is open source, and it is hosted on GitHub [here](https://github.com/xiaochuan-du/similar-items).

## Solution overview

OpenSearch Service provides text-matching and embedding k-NN search. You will use embedding k-NN search in this solution. Implementing this matching application consists of two phases:

- ML Model Training & Item Indexing — In this phase, you use Amazon SageMaker Pipeline to orchestrate an MLOps pipeline that pre-processes your raw input data, train an ML model to predict product category, encode item inventory into embeddings and store embeddings into a k-NN index in the OpenSearch Service.

- Item Matching & Category Prediction — This is the inference phase of the application. In this phase, you submit a query using the product(s)’s raw features to an Amazon SageMaker Endpoint through a client. The endpoint hosts an Amazon SageMaker Pipeline model which uses the trained ML model to predict categories and search similar items from the OpenSearch Service k-NN index. It returns the predicted category and similar items to the client.

Next, let’s take a closer look at each phase, with the corresponding AWS architecture.

## Architecture

The solution uses the following AWS services and features:

- You use Amazon S3 to store product information.

- You create an Amazon SageMaker Pipeline to orchestrate the MLOps ML model training and item indexing workflow.

- You use Amazon SageMaker Processing Job to transform raw product features.

- You use Amazon SageMaker Training Job to predict product category.

- You create an Amazon SageMaker Pipeline model to run inference.

- You create a SageMaker Batch Transform jobs to encode items into embeddings.

- You use Amazon SageMaker Processing Job to join item features and embeddings and then ingest them into an OpenSearch Service k-NN index.

- You use SageMaker Model Registry to catalog models for deployment.

- You use OpenSearch Service as the search engine to store item features and embeddings and find similar embeddings.

- You use a client to send requests to a SageMaker Endpoint and receive a response.

- You create a SageMaker Endpoint to host the product category prediction model.

- You host the SageMaker Pipeline model to make predictions and search similar items from the OpenSearch Service index.

[SageMaker Studio Notebooks](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sagemaker/latest/dg/notebooks.html)(not in the diagram) will be used as IDE to develop the solution.

## Setup

- Create a SageMaker Domain and a user profile. You can find it in step 5 of “To onboard to the Domain using Quick setup”.

- Create an OpenSearch Service domain. For instructions, see Creating and Managing Amazon OpenSearch Service Domains. You can also use an AWS CloudFormation template by following the instruction to create a domain.

## ML Model Training & Item Indexing

You are going to download the dataset and upload it to one of your own Amazon S3 buckets. The entire data pre-processing, model training, embedding generation, OpenSearch Service indexing, and model version registering workflow is orchestrated by [Amazon SageMaker Pipeline](https://aws.amazon.com/sagemaker/pipelines/). SageMaker Pipeline can create, automate, and manage end-to-end ML workflows at scale including massive data volumes, thousands of training experiments, and hundreds of model versions. The pipeline you are going to build will register a trained model version to a SageMaker Model Registry.

Data overview and preparation

You are going to use SageMaker Studio notebook with Python 3 (Data Science) kernel to execute the sample code.

For this post, you are using a subset of the [Amazon Product Reviews](https://cseweb.ucsd.edu/~jmcauley/datasets.html#amazon_reviews) dataset to build a prototype. The following table contains three columns of this dataset, including the features that you use to create the model.

You are going to select the 10,000 product data that belong to the “Office Products” category from the dataset. The level 3 category of the products will be used as a target in the exercise, for example, “Telephones & Accessories”, “Labels, Indexes & Stamps’” and “‘Printer Ink & Toner”.

```
def parse(path, limit):
    g = gzip.open(path, 'rb')
    for idx, line in enumerate(g):
        if idx < limit:
            yield ast.literal_eval(line.decode())
        else:
            break

def get_df(path, limit=10):
    data = {
      idx: dict_
      for idx, dict_ in enumerate(parse(path, limit))
    }
    return pd.DataFrame.from_dict(data, orient='index')

df = get_df('data/meta_Office_Products.json.gz', limit=10000)
```

In order to ensure you have a decent amount of data in each of the categories, you can merge rare categories ( < 0.5% ) into a class called “Others”.

```
def pick_level_3_cate(cates_series):
    if len(cates_series) > 1:
        for item in cates_series:
            if item[0] == 'Office Products':
                cates = item
                break
    else:
        cates = cates_series[0]
    return cates[2] if len(cates) >= 3 else cates[1]
level_3_cate = df.categories.apply(pick_level_3_cate)

cate_ratio = level_3_cate.value_counts() / len(level_3_cate)
rare_classes = set(cate_ratio[cate_ratio < 0.005].index.tolist())
level_3_cate[level_3_cate.isin(rare_classes)] = "Others"

df = df.assign(label=level_3_cate)
df.label.value_counts().plot(kind='barh')
```

In the following chart, on the y-axis, we have the class label. The x-axis shows the count of each class label. The chart shows the class distribution of the data. You can see that the categories “Printer Ink & Toner” and “Writing & Correction Supplies’” far outnumber the other classes. Even with the best algorithm, you may struggle to get good performance because of the large imbalance.

Model Building

The input of models are the product titles and descriptions, we can concatenate the columns into a single text column and use the [Hugging Face](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sagemaker/latest/dg/hugging-face.html) framework’s [Text classification](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/tasks/sequence_classification) with Amazon SageMaker to predict the class of each instance.

```
def generate_features(df):
    df = df.assign(
        text="Title::" + df.title + "\n\n\n" + "Description::" + df.description
    )
    return df[["text"]]
```

Two examples of the input text and label pair can be found below:

As explained in the post [AWS and Hugging Face collaborate to simplify and accelerate the adoption of Natural Language Processing models](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/machine-learning/aws-and-hugging-face-collaborate-to-simplify-and-accelerate-adoption-of-natural-language-processing-models/), and training a Hugging Face model on SageMaker is straightforward. We can do so by using the Hugging Face estimator from the [SageMaker SDK](https://sagemaker.readthedocs.io/en/stable/frameworks/huggingface/index.html?highlight=Hugging%2520Face).

You use the Hugging Face estimator with SageMaker SDK to train a text classification model.

```
hyperparameters = {
    "model_name_or_path": "distilbert-base-uncased",
    "output_dir": "/opt/ml/model",
    "train_file": "/opt/ml/input/data/train/train.csv",
    "validation_file": "/opt/ml/input/data/validation/validation.csv",
    "do_train": True,
    "do_eval": True,
    "num_train_epochs": 1,
    "save_total_limit": 1,
    # add your remaining hyperparameters
    # more info here https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/tree/v4.10.0/examples/pytorch/text-classification
}

# git configuration to download our fine-tuning script
git_config = {
    "repo": "https://github.com/huggingface/transformers.git",
    "branch": "v4.17.0",
}

# creates Hugging Face estimator
huggingface_estimator_bert = HuggingFace(
    entry_point="run_glue.py",
    source_dir="./examples/pytorch/text-classification",
    instance_type="ml.p3.2xlarge",
    instance_count=1,
    role=role,
    git_config=git_config,
    transformers_version="4.17.0",
    pytorch_version="1.10.2",
    py_version="py38",
    hyperparameters=hyperparameters,
    disable_profiler=True,
    sagemaker_session=sagemaker_session,
)
```

The data is divided into training, validation and test dataset. The training data will be used to train the model and then build embedding indexing. The validation data is used to monitor the training process. The testing data is used to measure the model performance and verify the match application’s workflow.

OpenSearch Service Indexing

Once a model is trained, you can use the model to generate embeddings. We can use [PyTorch forward hook](https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/generated/torch.nn.modules.module.register_module_forward_hook.html) to get intermediate activations from a HuggingFace PyTorch model. You can create a HuggingFaceModel having the customer code as the entry point, so when you run prediction using the model, the response can include the embedding.

```
activation = {"embeddings": []}
if if_extract_emb:

    def get_activation(name, embeddings):
        def hook(model, input, output):
            activation[name].append(output)

        return hook

    hf_pipeline.model.pre_classifier.register_forward_hook(
        get_activation("embeddings", activation)
    )
```

Then, you use [SageMaker Batch Transform](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sagemaker/latest/dg/batch-transform.html) to get inferences from the training datasets. The output of the job is available in Amazon S3. You then can create a [SageMaker Processing](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sagemaker/latest/dg/processing-job.html) Job, to ingest the embedding with original product information into an OpenSearch Service index.

The index settings can be configured to enable the k-NN functionality using the following configuration:

```
index_settings = {
  "settings": {
    "index.knn": True,
    "index.knn.space_type": "cosinesimil"
  },
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "embeddings": {
        "type": "knn_vector",
        "dimension": 768 # this dimension is determined by the text classifier header
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Then you can registry the model into [SageMaker Model Registry](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sagemaker/latest/dg/model-registry.html), which will ease the following deployment work.

The entire workflow looks like this:

The PipelineModel_Repack steps are used to bind the inference entry point with a trained ML model.

As you can see, you have an [Inference Pipeline](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sagemaker/latest/dg/inference-pipelines.html) model in the SageMaker Pipeline. An inference pipeline is a SageMaker model that is composed of a linear sequence of two to fifteen containers that process requests for inferences on data. You can combine your data pre-processing logic and model prediction into a single object, making it easier to manage the model lifecycle.

## Item Matching & Category Prediction

Now you have a trained ML model available in the model registry, and an OpenSearch Service index which includes product metadata and embeddings. You can deploy the ML model as a real-time endpoint and query the endpoint to make inferences.

Host a SageMaker Pipeline Model to query the OpenSearch Service Index

[SageMaker Real-time inference](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sagemaker/latest/dg/realtime-endpoints.html) is ideal for inference workloads where you have real-time, interactive, low latency requirements. You can deploy your model to SageMaker hosting services and get an endpoint that can be used for inference. We can deploy a real-time endpoint using a model version that exists in the model registry.

```
pck = get_approved_package(
    model_package_group_name
)
model_description = sm_client.describe_model_package(
    ModelPackageName=pck["ModelPackageArn"]
)

model_package_arn = model_description["ModelPackageArn"]

model = ModelPackage(
    role=role,
    model_package_arn=model_package_arn,
    sagemaker_session=sagemaker_session,
    vpc_config=dict(
        SecurityGroupIds=[security_group],
        Subnets=subnets
    )
)
model.deploy(
    initial_instance_count=1,
    instance_type="ml.m5.xlarge",
    endpoint_name=endpoint_name,
)
```

Once you deploy the endpoint, you are ready for making predictions

```
test_data = pd.read_csv(f"{test_path}/test.csv", header=None, names=output_raw_columns)

ground_true = test_data.pop(label_column)
instances = test_data.copy()

predictor = Predictor(
    endpoint_name=endpoint_name,
    serializer=CSVSerializer(),
    deserializer=JSONDeserializer(),
    content_type="text/csv",
    accept="application/json",
)

bz_ = 8
predictions = []

for batch_ in tqdm(range(len(instances) // bz_ + 1)):
    batch_instances = instances[batch_*bz_: (batch_+1)*bz_]
    batch_predictions = predictor.predict(batch_instances.to_csv(index=False, header=False))
    predictions.extend(batch_predictions)
```

You can compare the predictions with ground truth to calculate performance metrics.

```
from sklearn import metrics
print(metrics.classification_report(ground_true, predicted_label))
```

You can also use [t-SNE](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/T-distributed_stochastic_neighbor_embedding#:~:text=t%252Ddistributed%2520stochastic%2520neighbor%2520embedding%2520(t%252DSNE)%2520is,two%2520or%2520three%252Ddimensional%2520map.) to reduce the dimension of the product embeddings and plot their distribution of them.

As demonstrated in the example, various classes of office products are distributed among several clusters. Products with greater similarity are placed closer to each other. To verify the response of predictions, you can check the predicted labels and similar items from the response.

```
item_idx = 0
print(f"Predicted label: {predictions[item_idx]['label']}")
print("Similar items are")
[
    dict(
        label=item['_source']['label'],
        title=item['_source']['title'],
    )
    for item in predictions[item_idx]['similar_items']
]
```

## Clean up

SageMaker's pricing page can be found [here](https://aws.amazon.com/sagemaker/pricing/).

We suggest deleting the endpoints when they are no longer needed. After finishing this exercise, you can remove our resources with the following steps (you can delete these resources from the AWS console, using AWS SDK or SageMaker SDK):

- Delete the endpoint created.

- Delete the Amazon SageMaker Studio User-profile.

- Delete the Amazon SageMaker Studio Domain.

- Delete the CloudFormation stack you created.

## Summary

This post explores how to extract semantic meaning from product metadata and use it to predict the class to which a product belongs, as well as to match products to support the prediction from an index. This solution can help you scale out a taxonomy workload that might otherwise be manual or require constant updating to be efficient. Since you can deploy these models to a real-time inference endpoint, you can classify your data as soon as it arrives in your data lake.

## Where to go from here?

The OpenSearch Service ingestion implementation of the post is SageMaker Processing Job, if you want to ingest data from Amazon S3 into Amazon OpenSearch Service using serverless, you can follow a solution in [Ingesting enriched data into Amazon ES](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/industries/novartis-ag-uses-amazon-elasticsearch-k-nearest-neighbor-knn-and-amazon-sagemaker-to-power-search-and-recommendation/).

The pattern of ‘Transform, Encode, KNN search’ can be applied to build an embedding store and query similar items for various use cases. For instance, a graph neural network can be used to create embeddings of items and users, which can be employed in recommendation systems. Moreover, multi-modality ML models can be used to include additional information in the embedding, such as product images. You can also build LLM-empowered applications following the pattern, for example, you can use [Retrieval Augmented Generation](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/machine-learning/question-answering-using-retrieval-augmented-generation-with-foundation-models-in-amazon-sagemaker-jumpstart/) on top of SageMaker and OpenSearch services to enrich the search results further. This would ensure the generated text is based on facts and ML explainability is improved as well.
